>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 6:
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFULS
HUNKER DOWN IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,
WHILE THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES
LOOK BEYOND THAT FIRST PRIMARY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
CAMPAIGN ROAD AHEAD: HOW THE
COMPLEX DELEGATE RULES OF
INDIVIDUAL STATES HELP DETERMINE
WHO MAKES THE BALLOT IN
NOVEMBER.
>> Brangham: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT WITH POLITICS.
SINCE 1952, NEW HAMPSHIRE HAS
HELD ITS INFLUENTIAL, FIRST-IN-
THE-NATION PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY,
AND WILL DO SO AGAIN THREE DAYS
FROM NOW.
TUESDAY'S BALLOT FEATURES THE
TWO DEMOCRATS AND EIGHT
REPUBLICANS STILL IN THE RUNNING
FOR THE WHITE HOUSE.
NEW JERSEY'S CHRIS CHRISTIE IS
ONE OF THREE CURRENT OR FORMER
GOVERNORS REACHING FOR THE TOP
TIER OF THE REPUBLICAN PACK.
>> YOU GOT TO ASK FROM EACH OF
US, WHO DO YOU BELIEVE IS GOING
TO STAND FOR YOU?
>> Brangham: OHIO'S JOHN KASICH
IS ANOTHER, AS IS FLORIDA'S JEB
BUSH, WHO HAS GREETED VOTERS
WITH HIS 90-YEAR-OLD MOTHER.
>> GOOD TO MEET YOU.
>> Brangham: THE GOVERNORS ARE
TRYING TO CATCH BUSINESSMAN
DONALD TRUMP AND SENATORS TED
CRUZ AND MARCO RUBIO.
>> ON OUR WORST DAY, WE ARE A
HUNDRED TIMES BETTER THAN ANY OF
THE REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES.
>> Brangham: BEFORE KNOCKING ON
DOORS TODAY, DEMOCRATIC SENATOR
BERNIE SANDERS-- FROM THE STATE
NEXT DOOR, VERMONT-- APPEARED AT
A BIG PARTY FUNDRAISER, AS DID
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON.
>> YOU WANT A PRESIDENT WHO WILL
PULL UP HER SLEEVES AND MAKE A
DIFFERENCE IN YOUR LIVES!
(APPLAUSE)
>> Brangham: ...AND SEVEN
REMAINING REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES TAKE THE
DEBATE STAGE TONIGHT IN
MANCHESTER, NEW HAMPSHIRE.
THAT'S WHERE NATIONAL PUBLIC
RADIO SENIOR EDITOR AND
CORRESPONDENT RON ELVING IS
COVERING THE CAMPAIGN, AND HE
JOINS ME NOW.
>> THE BATTLE FOR SUPREMACY AT
THE TOP OF THE REPUBLICAN PACK
AS WELL AS AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
PACK.
THEY HAVE A BIG DEBATE TONIGHT,
WHAT ARE YOU EXPECTING TO SEE?
>> WE EXPECT TO SEE DONALD TRUMP
AND TED CRUZ FIRING BACK AND
FORTH AT EACH OTHER BECAUSE TED
CRUZ WON IOWA, DONALD TRUMP IS
POLLING WAY AHEAD HERE IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE AND NATIONALLY.
WE ALSO EXPECT TO SEE MANY OF
THE OTHER CANDIDATES GOING AFTER
MARCO RUBIO, WHO IS POLLING
SUDDENLY SECOND HERE IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE AFTER FINISHING THIRD
IN IOWA.
WE ALSO EXPECT MANY OF THESE
CANDIDATES TO BE ON THE BRINK OF
EXTINCTION AFTER THIS PRIMARY,
SO EVERYONE'S BATTLING TO GET IN
THERE AND ONE OF THE TOP THREE.
>> Brangham: DO YOU THINK
TRUMP CAN REAL ESTATE GAIN SOME
OF THE TRAJECTORY HE HAD AFTER
LOSING A LITTLE BIT TO CRUZ IN
IOWA?
>> SOME OF DONALD TRUMP'S POLLS
HERE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE SHOW HEM
WITH WELL OVER 30%.
IF HE CAN DO THAT HERE AND IF
TED CRUZ, AS IS QUITE POSSIBLE,
FALLS BACK TO SOMETHING LIKE
FOURTH PLACE, THEN IT REALLY
BECOMES DONALD TRUMP VERSUS THE
PACK, OR DONALD TRUMP VERSUS
MARCO RUBIO.
AND HE IS POLLING QUITE WELL IN
SOUTH CAROLINA, WHICH IS GOING
TO MATTER A GREAT KEEL TO THE
REPUBLICANS.
SO HE COULD RESTEER SOME OF THE
REMARKABLE MOMENTUM HE HAD HAD
LAST FALL.
>> Brangham: LET'S TURN NOW TO
THE DEMOCRATS.
BERNIE SANDERS CONTINUES TO DO
VERY WELL IN THE POLLS.
HE'S HERE IN NEW YORK TONIGHT TO
BE ON "SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE."
>> BERNIE SANDERS, OF COURSE, IS
A NEIGHBOR IN VERMONT TO NEW
HAMPSHIRE, AND HE WAS POPULAR
RIGHT FROM THE BEGINNING OF THIS
CONTEST.
BUT HIS NUMBERS ARE STILL QUITE
ROBUST AND EVEN RISING.
SO THERE'S A GREAT DEAL MORE
GOING ON HERE.
HILLARY CLINTON IS NOT MAKING
THE KIND OF CONNECTION,
PARTICULARLY WITH YOUNGER
VOTERS, AND INTENSELY LOYAL
PROGRESSIVES THAT BERNIE SANDERS
IS MAKING HERE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,
AND REALLY ALL AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
SO WHILE SHE IS STILL CERTAINLY
COMPETITIVE, AND WE EXPECT THIS
TO BE A LONG FIGHT, AND SHE
CERTAINLY DOES LOOK BRAVE AND
HAPPY AS SHE GOES AROUND THE
STATE, SHE'S GOING TO BE BEATEN
BADLY HERE, AND SHE KNOWS IT.
THE POLLS SHOW ANYTHING FROM 10
TO 30 POINT.
>> Brangham: IN FACT, HILLARY
HAS LEFT NEW HAMPSHIRE AND IS
GOING TO FLINT, MICHIGAN, I
UNDERSTAND.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT MOVE?
>> SHE WANTS TO CHANGE THE STAIR
LITTLE BIT FROM THE USUAL NEW
HAMPSHIRE DOOR KNOCKING AND
HANDSHAKING WHICH SHE HAS BEEN
DOING TODAY, BEFORE GOING TO
FLINT, AND SHE'S GOING TO COME
BACK.
BUT IN FLINT, MICHIGAN, THE LEAD
POISONING CRISIS THAT IS A
NATIONAL TRAGEDY, AND SHE HAS A
CHANCE TO SHOW SHE'S BEEN
CONCERNED FOR THAT FOR A WHILE
AND SHE CAN BE ONE ON ONE QUITE
PERSONABLE AND WARM WITH PEOPLE,
AND SHE DOES CARE ABOUT WHAT IS
REALLY CONCERNING PEOPLE IN
THEIR OWN EVERYDAY LIVES.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, RON
ELVING OF NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, WILLIAM.
>> Brangham: IN OTHER NEWS,
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS CALLING FOR
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO DOUBLE
ITS INVESTMENT IN RENEWABLE
ENERGY, TO TRY AND REDUCE THE
CARBON POLLUTION THAT
CONTRIBUTES TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
IN HIS WEEKLY ADDRESS TODAY, THE
PRESIDENT SAID THE BUDGET HE'LL
SEND TO CONGRESS NEXT TUESDAY
WOULD INCREASE RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT ON ENERGY SOURCES
LIKE WIND AND SOLAR--
FROM $6.5 BILLION THIS YEAR TO
NEARLY $13 BILLION A YEAR BY
2020.
>> WHILE REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS
ARE STILL CONSIDERING THEIR
POSITION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, MANY
OF THEM REALIZE THAT CLEAN
ENERGY IS AN INCREDIBLE SOURCE
OF GOOD-PAYING JOBS FOR THEIR
CONSTITUENTS.
>> Brangham: BUT AS WITH ALL
SPENDING BILLS, CONGRESS MUST
APPROVE THE PRESIDENT'S REQUEST.
IN TAIWAN, AT LEAST 14 PEOPLE
ARE DEAD AND MORE THAN 100 ARE
UNACCOUNTED FOR, AFTER A STRONG,
PRE-DAWN EARTHQUAKE TODAY.
RESCUE EFFORTS FOCUSED ON A
COLLAPSED 17-STORY APARTMENT
BUILDING IN THE CITY OF TAINAN,
WHERE 11 OF THE DEAD WERE FOUND.
RESCUERS PULLED AT LEAST 340
PEOPLE FROM THE RUBBLE,
INCLUDING THIS YOUNG BOY.
MOST PEOPLE WERE ASLEEP WHEN THE
6.4 MAGNITUDE QUAKE STRUCK.
TAIWAN'S INTERIOR MINISTER SAYS
THERE WILL BE AN INVESTIGATION
INTO WHY THE LARGE APARTMENT
BUILDING COLLAPSED.
NINE SMALLER BUILDINGS IN TAINAN
ALSO FELL, THOUGH MOST
STRUCTURES IN THIS CITY OF
1.8 MILLION PEOPLE WERE NOT
SERIOUSLY DAMAGED.
THE 15-YEAR TREND IN DECLINING
TRAFFIC DEATHS IN THE UNITED
STATES HAS COME TO A FULL STOP.
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION REPORTS
FATALITIES ON U.S. ROADS AND
HIGHWAYS WENT UP LAST YEAR.
FOR THE FIRST NINE MONTHS OF
2015, TRAFFIC DEATHS ROSE A
SHARP 9.3%, COMPARED TO THE SAME
PERIOD IN 2014.
MORE THAN 26,000 PEOPLE DIED ON
THE ROAD-- THE MOST IN THE FIRST
NINE MONTHS OF ANY YEAR SINCE
2008.
TRAFFIC DEATHS HAD BEEN FALLING
STEADILY SINCE THE YEAR 2000,
DROPPING BY SOME 22%.
OFFICIALS SAY 94% OF THE
FATALITIES RESULTED FROM HUMAN
ERROR, SUCH AS DRUNK DRIVING,
NOT WEARING SEAT BELTS, AND
DRIVING WHILE TEXTING.
OFFICIALS ALSO ATTRIBUTE THE
SPIKE TO MORE PEOPLE DRIVING
MORE MILES, AS A RESULT OF BOTH
LOWER GAS PRICES AND LOWER
UNEMPLOYMENT.
>> Brangham: DESPITE THE
OUTSIZED ATTENTION THEY RECEIVE
FROM CANDIDATES AND THE MEDIA,
NEW HAMPSHIRE AND IOWA, WHICH
HELD CAUCUSES ON MONDAY, ACCOUNT
FOR LESS THAN 5% OF THE
DELEGATES AT STAKE IN THE
NATIONAL CONVENTIONS WHERE THE
REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRATIC
NOMINEES WILL BE RATIFIED THIS
SUMMER.
FOR INSTANCE, AFTER WINNING
IOWA, REPUBLICAN TED CRUZ HAS
EIGHT DELEGATES, WHILE MARCO
RUBIO AND DONALD TRUMP EACH HAVE
SEVEN.
PRIMARIES AND CAUCUSES ARE
SCHEDULED THROUGH JUNE, THOUGH
CANDIDATES IN BOTH PARTIES MAY
EMERGE WITH THE MAGIC NUMBER OF
PLEDGED DELEGATES NEEDED TO WIN
THE NOMINATION SOONER.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD REPORTS ON THE LONG
ROAD AHEAD, AND THE DIFFERENT
SETS OF RULES FOR CHOOSING
DELEGATES IN EACH STATE.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHERE
AMERICAN POLITICS LIVES, THIS
WEEK.
THE CANDIDATES...
>> I WANTED YOU TO MEET MY
FAMILY BECAUSE THEY'RE GOING TO
BE HERE FOR EIGHT DAYS.
>> Reporter: THE CROWDS, THE
LAST-MINUTE APPEALS...
>> I'M JUST TRYING TO DO THE
BEST I CAN TO HELP OUR COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: ...THE ATTACKS
AND COUNTER-ATTACKS...
>> DONALD HASN'T REALLY
OUTLINED ANY POSITION OR POLICY.
>> Reporter: BUT WHILE NEW
HAMPSHIRE IS OBVIOUSLY THE
CENTER OF THE POLITICAL
UNIVERSE THIS WEEK, THE REAL
FIGHT FOR THE NOMINATION WILL
BEGIN AFTER TUESDAY'S PRIMARY,
WHEN THE SURVIVORS SET OUT ON A
LONG, WINDING, FOUR MONTH-LONG
ROAD, WHOSE INCREDIBLY
COMPLICATED RULES WILL IN LARGE
MEASURE DETERMINE WHO WINS THE
NOMINATION AND HOW.
IN FACT, REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS TRAVEL TWO DIFFERENT
ROADS, WITH RULES THAT REFLECT
THE DIFFERENT CORE
PHILOSOPHIES OF THE PARTIES.
DEMOCRATS REQUIRE EVERY STATE TO
USE PRETTY MUCH THE SAME RULES
FOR AWARDING DELEGATES.
>> DEMOCRATS ARE VERY, VERY
REGIMENTED AND VERY CENTRALLY
RULED.
>> Reporter: AUTHOR AND
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION SCHOLAR
ELAINE KAMARCK HAS BEEN ON THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY'S RULES
COMMITTEE FOR ALMOST 20 YEARS.
>> SO WE TELL THE STATES EXACTLY
HOW MANY DELEGATES THEY CAN HAVE
AND HOW MANY DELEGATES EACH
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT CAN HAVE
IN THE STATE.
WE TELL THE STATES HOW THEY HAVE
TO ALLOCATE DELEGATES TO
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES.
THERE'S A LOT OF CENTRAL CONTROL
FROM WASHINGTON ON THE
DEMOCRATIC STATE PARTIES.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRATS REQUIRE
EVERY STATE TO AWARD DELEGATES
PROPORTIONALLY, IN A PERCENTAGE
THAT MORE OR LESS REFLECTS THEIR
PRIMARY VOTE TOTAL.
THEY'VE LONG BANNED THE "WINNER-
TAKE ALL" APPROACH.
REPUBLICANS, BY CONTRAST, TAKE A
MORE "FEDERALIST" APPROACH.
>> THE THEORY BEHIND THE
REPUBLICAN DELEGATE SELECTION
PROCESS IS THAT EACH STATE HAS A
GREAT DEAL OF AUTHORITY AND
AUTONOMY IN CHOOSING ITS OWN
METHOD.
>> Reporter: BEN GINSBERG IS
FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE
AND WAS AN ELECTION LAWYER FOR
THE CAMPAIGNS OF GEORGE W. BUSH
AND MITT ROMNEY.
HE SAYS THIS YEAR'S RULES ARE A
MIXED BAG OF PROPORTIONAL AND
WINNER-TAKE-ALL STATES.
>> THERE IS A PERIOD OF
PROPORTIONALITY, IN THIS CASE
IT'S THE FIRST 14 DAYS IN MARCH,
MUST BE STATES DIVIDING UP THEIR
DELEGATES PROPORTIONALLY.
BUT OTHER THAN THAT, THE STATES
CAN DO IT PRETTY MUCH ANY WAY
THEY WANT TO.
>> Reporter: IF YOU WANT TO SEE
JUST HOW CRITICAL SUCH RULES CAN
BE, LOOK BACK TO 2008.
WHEN REPUBLICAN JOHN McCAIN WON
EARLY WINNER-TAKE-ALL PRIMARIES
IN BIG STATES LIKE FLORIDA, NEW
YORK, AND NEW JERSEY, HE GOT ALL
THE DELEGATES, HELPING HIM
SECURE THE NOMINATION IN EARLY
MARCH.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, ALTHOUGH
HILLARY CLINTON WON MOST OF THE
BIG STATES, LIKE OHIO AND
PENNSYLVANIA, BECAUSE OF
PROPORTIONAL RULES, SHE TOOK
HOME ONLY A HANDFUL MORE
DELEGATES THAN BARACK OBAMA DID
BY FINISHING SECOND.
OBAMA, ON THE OTHER HAND,
CAMPAIGNED HARD IN SMALL STATES,
LIKE IDAHO AND KANSAS, AND WON
SUCH A HUGE PROPORTION OF VOTES,
HE ACTUALLY WENT HOME WITH A
LARGER SURPLUS OF DELEGATES THAN
CLINTON DID IN THE BIG STATES.
>> IF YOU DON'T UNDERSTAND THE
DELEGATE GAME, YOU CAN MAKE A
LOT OF MISTAKES.
AND THE HISTORY OF THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION PROCESS
IS JUST FILLED WITH EXAMPLES
WHERE A CAMPAIGN MADE THE WRONG
CALL AND IT COST THEM MOMENTUM
AND EVENTUALLY THE NOMINATION.
SO UNDERSTANDING THIS IS THE KEY
TO WINNING THE NOMINATION.
>> Reporter: FOR 2016, IT'S THE
REPUBLICAN ROAD, WITH ITS
DIZZYING ARRAY OF RULES THAT
REQUIRES CLOSE ATTENTION.
EACH FLIP OF THE CALENDAR BRINGS
NEW STATES FRONT AND CENTER,
WITH THEIR OWN RULES ABOUT HOW
DELEGATES ARE WON.
SO HANG ON, IT CAN GET VERY
BUMPY.
AFTER NEW HAMPSHIRE, COMES SOUTH
CAROLINA.
THE WINNER THERE HAS WON THE
REPUBLICAN NOMINATION IN EVERY
CAMPAIGN, EXCEPT 2012.
NEVADA VOTES THREE DAYS LATER.
A KEY DATE IS MARCH 1, WHEN
TWELVE STATES AWARD 632
REPUBLICAN DELEGATES, A QUARTER
OF THE TOTAL.
SOME CALL THIS "SUPER TUESDAY."
IT'S LED BY SEVEN SOUTHERN
STATES, INCLUDING TEXAS,
GEORGIA, TENNESSEE, AND ALABAMA.
IF YOU'RE CELEBRITY BUSINESSMAN
DONALD TRUMP, YOU APPROACH THESE
STATES THE SAME WAY YOU DO THE
OTHERS.
HOLD HUGE RALLIES AND HOPE THAT
YOUR FAME AND YOUR WORDS TURN
SUPPORTERS INTO VOTERS-- AND
VOTERS INTO A BIG PROPORTION OF
DELEGATES.
SENATOR TED CRUZ'S CAMPAIGN HAS
A FAR MORE SPECIFIC APPROACH TO
WIN HIS PROPORTION OF DELEGATES:
TARGETING THE LARGE PERCENTAGE
OF REPUBLICAN VOTERS WHO CALL
THEMSELVES "EVANGELICAL"-- HIS
BASE.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHO DREW THE
MAP, BUT WE THANK THEM.
>> Reporter: RICK TYLER, THE
CRUZ CAMPAIGN'S COMMUNICATION
DIRECTOR, KNOWS THE EVANGELICAL
MAKEUP OF THESE STATES BY HEART.
>> YOU GO TO GEORGIA, WHICH HAS
OVER 60%, THEN YOU HAVE
TENNESSEE, IS OVER 70%.
ALABAMA, OVER 70%.
MISSISSIPPI, OVER 50%.
TEXAS IS OVER 50%.
OKLAHOMA HAS OVER 70%.
ARKANSAS HAS OVER 60%.
ALL THOSE STATES ARE GOING TO GO
ON MARCH 1, EXCEPT FOR
MISSISSIPPI, WHICH WILL GO ON
MARCH 8, AND THE EVANGELICAL
VOTES ARE JUST FRONTLOADED IN
THIS CAMPAIGN.
NOW, THAT'S AN ADVANTAGE TO US,
BECAUSE WE APPEAL TO THE
EVANGELICALS.
WE'VE ALREADY PROVED THAT IN
IOWA.
>> Reporter: THAT CONSTITUENCY'S
POWER IN THESE EARLY STATES
EXPLAINS WHY SENATOR MARCO RUBIO
HAS BEEN EMPHASIZING HIS
RELIGIOUS COMMITMENT.
>> OUR RIGHTS DO NOT COME FROM
OUR GOVERNMENT.
OUR RIGHTS COME FROM OUR
CREATOR.
>> Reporter: AND IF YOU'RE OHIO
GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH, ASSUMING
YOU SURVIVE NEW HAMPSHIRE, YOU
LOOK AT MARCH 1 DELEGATE
OPPORTUNITIES OUTSIDE THE SOUTH:
MINNESOTA, MASSACHUSETTS,
VERMONT-- AND YOU STAKE YOUR
PROSPECTS ON A DIFFERENT
PREMISE.
>> YOU'RE GOING TO THINK THAT I
FELL OFF A TURNIP TRUCK OR
SOMETHING ON THE WAY TO
POLITICS.
I HAVEN'T BEEN DOING IT FOR A
WHILE.
JEFF, I THINK PEOPLE ARE PEOPLE.
THEY HAVE THE SAME ANXIETIES
EVERYWHERE.
I DON'T TAILOR.
I'VE NEVER CHANGED MY MESSAGE
FROM IOWA TO HERE TO SOUTH
CAROLINA TO NEVADA.
I THINK WHAT'S HAPPENING IS
MAYBE THERE ARE POLITICIANS WHO
ARE PLAYING TO CERTAIN FACTIONS.
BUT I GUESS I'M A TRUE BELIEVER.
I THINK I CAN GET EVERY VOTE.
>> Reporter: CANDIDATES LIKE
KASICH CAN TAKE HEART FROM
REPUBLICAN RULES THAT KEEP THESE
EARLY STATES PROPORTIONAL.
EVEN WITHOUT WINNING, THEY MIGHT
PICK UP SOME DELEGATES.
THAT HELPED EVENTUAL REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE MITT ROMNEY IN 2012.
JOSH PUTNAM, A LECTURER AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF GEORGIA, HAS A
BLOG-- FRONTLOADING HQ-- WHICH
FOCUSES ON THESE RULES.
>> HE WASN'T WORRIED
NECESSARILY, OR HIS CAMPAIGN WAS
NOT WORRIED ABOUT WINNING IN
MISSISSIPPI OR ALABAMA OR
OKLAHOMA.
THEY JUST WANTED TO PERFORM WELL
ENOUGH TO QUALIFY FOR DELEGATES
AND REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF
ADVANTAGE THAT HIS COMPETITORS,
SANTORUM AND GINGRICH, GOT OUT
OF THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE'S A
CATCH-- IN TWO DOZEN STATES
THROUGHOUT THE REPUBLICAN
PRIMARY SEASON, A CANDIDATE
NEEDS TO REACH A "THRESHOLD"-
ANYWHERE FROM FIVE TO 20% OF THE
VOTE-- IN ORDER TO QUALIFY FOR
ANY DELEGATES AT ALL.
>> WHEN PEOPLE THINK
PROPORTIONAL, OR WHEN I SAY
PROPORTIONAL, I THINK WHAT
PEOPLE THINK IS, WELL IF YOU WIN
40% OF THE VOTE, YOU GET AROUND
40% OF THE DELEGATES OUT OF
THAT.
AND THAT'S SIMPLY NOT THE CASE.
>> Reporter: PUTNAM POINTS TO
HIS OWN STATE OF GEORGIA AS AN
EXAMPLE OF HOW SOME DELEGATE-
RICH STATES HAVE A HYBRID
SYSTEM: PART PROPORTIONAL, PART
WINNER-TAKE-ALL.
>> GEORGIA HAS A SYSTEM WHERE,
YOU KNOW, IF YOU GET ABOVE 20%
OF THE VOTE STATEWIDE, YOU GET A
SHARE OF 31 AT-LARGE DELEGATES.
>> Reporter: WHEN IT COMES TO
CHOOSING THOSE AT-LARGE
DELEGATES AT THE STATEWIDE
LEVEL, IT'S PROPORTIONAL.
BUT AT THE CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT LEVEL, IT CAN BE
WINNER-TAKE-ALL.
>> BUT THERE'S STILL THAT BATTLE
TO BE WAGED IN EACH OF THE 14
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS OF
GEORGIA.
BUT IF YOU CAN WIN A MAJORITY IN
ONE OF THOSE CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICTS, YOU GET ALL THREE
DELEGATES FROM THAT
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT.
>> Reporter: WITH THE EXCEPTION
OF DONALD TRUMP, NO SERIOUS
CAMPAIGN WILL IGNORE THESE
COMPLEX RULES, BECAUSE THEY
DETERMINE WHERE RESOURCES SHOULD
AND SHOULDN'T BE DEPLOYED.
REPUBLICAN ELECTION LAWYER BEN
GINSBERG:
>> SO TAKE FOR EXAMPLE THE MARCH
1 STATES.
THERE ARE 12 STATES THAT GO.
THEY'RE DISPERSED AROUND THE
COUNTRY, ALTHOUGH THE
CONCENTRATION IN THE SOUTH.
NO ONE WILL BE ABLE TO AFFORD,
UNDER THE FEDERAL CAMPAIGN
FINANCE RULES, THE AMOUNT OF
MONEY THEY HAVE IN THE BANK, TO
RUN 12 STATEWIDE RACES.
SO IN TODAY'S WORLD OF MODERN
CAMPAIGNS, THE SMART CAMPAIGNS
HAVE DONE A LOT OF LIST
DEVELOPMENT WORK, MICRO-
TARGETING WORK, TO FIND OUT
WHERE THEIR SUPPORTERS ARE, WHO
THEY ARE AND HOW TO REACH THEM.
>> Reporter: FIVE WEEKS AFTER
THE NEW HAMPSHIRE TUMULT DIES
DOWN, THE REPUBLICAN PRIMARY
ROAD TAKES A RADICAL TURN.
AFTER MARCH 15, STATES ARE FREE
TO ALLOCATE DELEGATES PRETTY
MUCH ANY WAY THEY WANT:
PROPORTIONAL, BY CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT, EVEN WINNER-TAKE-ALL,
AND WOE BE TO A CAMPAIGN THAT
DOES NOT UNDERSTAND HOW
IMPORTANT THAT TURN IS.
THIS YEAR, THERE ARE ONLY TWO
EARLY "WINNER TAKE ALL" CONTESTS
FOR REPUBLICANS-- AND THEY'RE
BIG ONES-- OHIO AND FLORIDA.
BOTH VOTE ON MARCH 15.
THE ONLY CANDIDATE WHO GETS ANY
DELEGATES IS THE ONE WHO COMES
IN FIRST.
OTHER BIG STATES DOWN THE ROAD
LIKE PENNSYLVANIA--WHICH HAS 71
DELEGATES AT STAKE ON APRIL 26--
USE A HYBRID SYSTEM-- PART
WINNER-TAKE-ALL, PART
PROPORTIONAL.
PENNSYLVANIA REPUBLICANS ARE
MORE MODERATE AND MORE SECULAR
THAN SOUTHERN REPUBLICANS, BUT
THE CONSERVATIVE CRUZ CAMPAIGN
INTENDS TO REACH ITS VOTERS
THERE BY USING DATA ANALYSIS.
>> WE ACTUALLY CAN TELL FROM
ANALYTICAL DATA THAT CONSUMERS
OFFERED TO MARKETING COMPANIES
ALL THE TIME, WHAT THEY LIKE AND
HOW THEY WANT IT TO BE
COMMUNICATED WITH.
SO WE ACTUALLY DON'T HAVE ONE
SCRIPT FOR SOMEBODY WHO'S PRO-
LIFE OR ONE SCRIPT FOR SOMEBODY
WHO'S PRO-GUN.
WE HAVE DIFFERENT SCRIPTS
BECAUSE PEOPLE LIKE TO HEAR
THEIR ISSUES IN DIFFERENT WAYS.
>> Reporter: NO ONE CAN SAY
WHETHER THE ROAD TO THE
NOMINATION WILL STRETCH ALL THE
WAY TO THE CALIFORNIA PRIMARY IN
JUNE.
BUT THIS CAN BE SAID: IT'S FAR
LESS COLORFUL THAN THE SPECTACLE
OF A CAMPAIGN RALLY AND THE
CLASH OF IDEAS AND PERSONALITIES
IN A HEATED DEBATE.
BUT WHEN THE TUMULT AND THE
SHOUTING DIES DOWN, AND THE
NOMINEE EMERGES, THESE "RULES"
OF THE ROAD OFTEN MATTER A WHOLE
LOT MORE.
STAY UP TO DATE ON ALL OF THE
2016 CAMPAIGN EVENTS, DEBATES
AND PRIMARIES WITH OUR ONLINE
ELECTION CALENDAR.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Brangham: IN SYRIA,
GOVERNMENT FORCES LOYAL TO
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD HAVE
INTENSIFIED THEIR OFFENSIVE ON
THE CITY OF ALEPPO, CAUSING TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF REFUGEES TO FLEE
TOWARD SYRIA'S BORDER WITH
TURKEY.
MANY NOW AMASSED AT MAKESHIFT
CAMPS, HOPING TO CROSS INTO
TURKEY.
ALEPPO-- WHICH WAS ONCE SYRIA'S
MOST POPULOUS CITY-- HAS BEEN
CONTROLLED BY REBEL FORCES
OPPOSED TO ASSAD.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES HAVE
BEEN BACKED BY INTENSE RUSSIAN
MILITARY AIRSTRIKES FOR FOUR
MONTHS.
THIS ONGOING FIGHTING CAUSED
UNITED NATIONS-BROKERED PEACE
TALKS IN SWITZERLAND TO DISBAND
THIS WEEK.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN SYRIA IS
BRIAN JENKINS.
HE'S WRITTEN A SERIES OF
STUDIES ON THE CONFLICT FOR
THE RAND CORPORATION.
THIS MOVE AGAINST ALEPPO, MANY
PEOPLE THINK THAT THIS IS A
MAJOR TURNING POINT IN THE
CONFLICT AND GIVES IT A DECISIVE
POTENTIAL WIN TO ASSAD.
IS THAT YOUR ASSESSMENT AS WELL?
>> NO, WE'VE SEEN A LOT OF
TURNING POINTS IN SYRIA'S SPIRAL
OF VIOLENCE.
ALEPPO HAS BEEN A CONTESTED CITY
SINCE 2012.
THERE HAS BEEN CONTINUING
FIGHTING IN THE CITY.
THIS PARTICULAR CAMPAIGN TO
DRIVE THE REBELS OUT OF THE
PARTS OF THE CITY THEY HOLD
BEGAN LAST OCTOBER.
I SUSPECT IT'S GOING TO GO ON,
AND EVEN IF THE SYRIAN FORCES
ARE ABLE TO RETAKE THE ENTIRE
CITY OF ALEPPO, IT IS NOT LIKE
LIE THAT THEY'RE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO RESTORE GOVERNMENT
AUTHORITY THROUGHOUT THE
TERRITORY OF SYRIA.
>> Brangham: IF ALEPPO IS
BLOCKED OFF, WE SAW WHAT
HAPPENED WHEN SMALLER SYRIAN
CITIES WERE BLOCKADED BY ASSAD'S
SOURCES, AND WE SAW HORRIBLE
IMAGES OF STARVATION AND YOUNG
CHILDREN BEING INCREDIBLY
MALNOURISHED.
IS THAT LIKELY TO HAPPEN IN
ALEPPO AS WELL?
>> WE COULD SEE A POTENTIAL
SIEGE AND A POTENTIAL SLAUGHTER.
FIGHTING IN URBAN AREAS IS NASTY
AND BRUTAL.
AND IT CAN COME DOWN TO
BLOCK-BY-BLOCK, HOUSE-BY-HOUSE
FIGHTING IS WHICH DISASTROUS FOR
CIVILIAN POPULATIONS.
WE'VE SEEN SOME OF THAT ALREADY
IN ALEPPO.
MUCH OF THE OLD PART OF THE
CITY, THE HISTORIC PART OF THE
CITY, HAS BEEN DESTROYED OR
BADLY DAMAGED.
>> Brangham: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE BROADLY.
WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR THE
LARGER FIGHT AGAINST ISIS WHICH
OBSTENSIBLY REMAINS THE U.S.'
PRIMARY CONCERN IN SYRIA.
WHAT'S HAPPENING ON THAT FRONT?
>> WHEN THE RUSSIANS INTERVENE,
THEY INTERVENE TO PROTECT AN
ENCLAVE, ROUGHLY A RECTANGLE OF
WESTERN SYRIA, WHICH WAS THE
LOYALIST BASTION OF THE ASSAD
REGIME'S FORCES.
THE FORCES, THE REBEL FORCES
THAT ARE BEING STRUCK BY THE
RUSSIAN AIRCRAFT AND THAT ARE
THE TARGETS OF THIS OFFENSIVE
ARE PRIMARILY AL-NUSRA,
AL QAEDA'S AFFILIATE IN SYRIA,
AND SOME OF THE OTHER
LESS-EXTREME, MORE MODERATE
ELEMENTS OF THE INSURGENTS THAT
ARE BACKED BY THE WEST.
ISIL OR ISIS, THE FORCES ARE
CONCENTRATED IN EASTERN SYRIA,
AND THAT HAS BEEN THE PRIMARY
TARGET OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Brangham: WE'VE SEEN THESE
PEACE TALKS BREAK DOWN.
I MEAN, IS THERE ANY SENSE THAT
PROGRESS COULD BE MADE?
AND IF SO WHAT, WOULD THAT
PROGRESS ACTUALLY LOOK LIKE?
>> I REMAIN EXTREMELY SKEPTICAL
OF A SUCCESSFUL PEACE PROCESS
RIGHT NOW.
THE EXTERNAL ACTORS HAVE
COMPETING INTEREST.
THE INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPANTS,
THOSE GROUPS FIGHTING INSIDE OF
SYRIA ARE INVOLVED IN A CONFLICT
THAT HAS BECOME INCREASINGLY
SECTARIAN.
IN THE LONG RUN, I SUPPOSE
IT'S-- IT IS POSSIBLE TO LOOK AT
A SERIES OF LOCAL
ACCOMMODATIONS, A SERIES OF
CEASE FIRES.
BUT THAT WOULD LEAVE IN PLACE
PRIMARILY THE PARTITION THAT WE
ALREADY SEE IN SYRIA TODAY.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, BRIAN
JENKINS OF THE RAND CORPORATION,
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Brangham: NOW AN UPDATE ON A
FEW OF OUR RECENT SIGNATURE
SEGMENTS.
LAST MONTH, MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTED ON EFFORTS BY
BROOKLYN'S DISTRICT ATTORNEY TO
CLEAR A BACKLOG OF OUTSTANDING
ARREST WARRANTS.
THESE WERE STEMMING FROM
CITATIONS FOR NONVIOLENT, LOW
LEVEL CRIMES.
THESE WARRANTS ARE ISSUED WHEN
PEOPLE FAIL TO APPEAR IN
CRIMINAL COURT-- SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENS ALMOST 40% OF THE TIME
IN NEW YORK CITY.
SINCE OUR REPORT, NEW YORK CITY
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO AND THE
CITY COUNCIL HAVE BACKED A
PROPOSED CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM
THAT WOULD LET POLICE ISSUE
A CIVIL TICKET INSTEAD OF A
CRIMINAL SUMMONS FOR THESE
SO-CALLED "QUALITY OF LIFE"
OFFENSES-- THINGS LIKE DRINKING
IN PUBLIC OR REMAINING IN A PARK
AFTER DARK.
AND TWO WEEKS AGO, CHRIS BURY
REPORTED ON THE EFFORTS OF SOME
U.S. POLICE DEPARTMENTS TO TRAIN
OFFICERS TO USE LESS THAN LETHAL
FORCE IN MORE OF THEIR
ENCOUNTERS.
PHILADELPHIA IS ONE OF THOSE
DEPARTMENTS, AND NOW ITS FORMER
POLICE COMMISSIONER, CHARLES
RAMSEY-- WHO APPEARED IN OUR
STORY-- HAS BEEN TAPPED TO HELP
RETRAIN THE CHICAGO POLICE, WHO
HAVE BEEN EMBROILED IN SEVERAL
CONTROVERSIAL CASES, WHERE
POLICE OFFICERS SHOT UNARMED
CIVILIANS.
IN ADDITION, THE "POLICE
EXECUTIVE RESEARCH FORUM," A
POLICE RESEARCH AND POLICY
ORGANIZATION, HAS UNVEILED
30 PRINCIPLES AND TACTICS FOR
THE NATION'S 18,000 LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES--
ALL IN AN EFFORT TO DE-ESCALATE
POTENTIALLY VIOLENT ENCOUNTERS,
TO ENGAGE IN MORE EFFECTIVE
COMMUNICATION, AND TO DIMINISH
THE USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE.
AND LAST WEEK, CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER BROUGHT US THE STORY
ABOUT THE STATE DEPARTMENT-
SPONSORED COMPETITION ENLISTING
COLLEGE STUDENTS TO COMBAT
VIOLENT EXTREMIST PROPAGANDA AND
RECRUITING MESSAGES BY GROUPS
LIKE ISIS, ON SOCIAL MEDIA.
ONE TEAM THAT APPEARED IN OUR
STORY, FROM THE U.S. MILITARY
ACADEMY AT WEST POINT, PLACED
SECOND OUT OF 45 TEAMS THAT
COMPETED.
THE WINNER: THE LAHORE
UNIVERSITY OF MANAGEMENT
SCIENCES, IN PAKISTAN.
>> Brangham: LASTLY, A NEW
DEVELOPMENT IN THE NATION'S
OPIOID EPIDEMIC.
A LOS ANGELES DOCTOR CONVICTED
OF OVERPRESCRIBING OPIOD PAIN
KILLER WILL SPEND 30 YEARS TO
LIFE IN PRISON.
LISA SANG IS THE FIRST U.S.
DOCTOR EVER CONVICTED OF
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER FOR
OVERPRESCRIBING THE DRUGS.
THREE OF HER PATIENTS DIED OF
OVERDOSES.
BEFORE THE JUDGE HANDED DOWN HER
SENTENCE YESTERDAY, SANGER
APOLOGIZED TO THE VICTIMS APSE
FAMILIES.
THE DRUG INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATION SAY SHE WROTE
ROUGHLY 25 PRESCRIPTIONS OVER
THREE YEARS A DAY.
FOLLOW THE DEBATE TONIGHT WITH
US ONLINE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.